---
layout: post
title: "Two-dos"
date: "2015-05-26"
tags:
- productivity
---

I used to waste hours each week looking for the perfect productivity tool, to
organise my day and life in general<sup>*</sup>. I used quite a few different
task management tools, plain text, nothing, pen & paper, bla bla bla... and I
would always go back to my disorganised, unproductive self.  
&nbsp;  

<blockquote>
Progress happens when you get your hands dirty everyday
</blockquote>

Yes, I know, "I'm the problem" - you say - "the tools are just a quick fix, a
distraction." - and I cannot disagree with you, but I can't agree either. That
is a misnomer, that right there is a source of frustration, it implies
something's broken and may be hard to fix and definitely can't be replaced.  
I've finally fixed the problem (I hope), I've been consistent for longer than ever!
(more than a year, but who's counting anyway?).  
&nbsp;  
Why do I agree with you? Because it wasn't a problem with the tools, to be honest,
whatever frees me to type without interruptions and doesn't lose data
in a stupid sync bug or a house fire, is great enough.  
&nbsp;  
Why don't I agree with you? Because it wasn't me either, not in the same sense your
observation seemed to suggest.  
&nbsp;  
&nbsp;  

## The Realisation

It was a problem of observation! You read all this productivity porn and is easy
to get carried away and believe there are right tools, right mindsets, right
whatever-elses and wrong ones...  
It is true, there are groups of good and bad
practices, but it's hardly well defined, not guarateed and rarely the subject of
the assertive blog posts out there, the "10 things you must do with your life",
"You must be a Zen master to be busier" (what?), all those contradictory
self-indulging tutorials on how to **be like this successful type** that usually
start or end (but certainly include) **"be yourself"**.  
&nbsp;  
"What do I mean with observation?" Simple, observe yourself over time and
experiment new things.  
&nbsp;  
There's this latent message that you need to do X to fix Y and as soon as you do
X, results show overnight. That's misleading to say the least.  
&nbsp;  

<blockquote>
Don't aim to fail, that's just an excuse for sloppiness
</blockquote>
&nbsp;  

My realisation was simple, it is the process! It is the person you turn into when
you join the quest for self-improvement, not the short-term victories, but the
pleasure of observation of one-self (in a selfless way, note!), of looking inwards
for the "machine" within the machine and turn the different knobs you find.  
You don't need to change yourself in big ways, although that may naturally
happen overtime, but you turn these knobs which slightly change your behaviour and
observe which ones work and which ones don't (and why if you can).  

Then it is important to realise, the "machine" has a life of it's own and the
knobs will keep turning by themselves. You have to keep observing, sometimes your
reality, your environment changed and you need to experiment a bit more, some
other times your knobs just went into this crazy configuration, you need to
experiment too! Yes, experimentation! You try, you fail, you try again!  

**Don't aim to fail**, that's just an excuse for sloppiness, just **don't get
too anxious when it happens**. It's a feedback loop which you want to keep positive.  
Sometimes you get it wrong, but you know you'll keep trying, and that's it.  
&nbsp;  
&nbsp;  
The World out there keeps telling you there is a solution, and you
keep getting frustrated. You seem to be the only one of the people you care about
that is missing the point!  

Blog posts are a great source of ideas and inspiration (so are books, movies, people, games...),
but that's about it. You truly are the only requirement to enter this
self-improvement adventure! I'm not suggesting you do it alone, I'm just pointing out
that the final answers are between your ears (or the sockets if you lost them in a
nasty accident), but to unlock those answers, you have to listen to yourself and others.  
&nbsp;  
&nbsp;  

---  

## Some Tips on Organisation <small>(or lack of it)</small>

And just so you don't come out of this rant saying "yah right, what about some
practical tips then, some ideas, is this it?", here are three which helped me greatly:  
&nbsp;  

1. Some things are better left disorganised. Not everything is well defined. You
can create a process that triggers creativity, but once it starts bearing some
fruits, it's hard to have a process to harvest them, each case is different and
you must be ready for it. Don't be strict, just harvest what you can, keep your
eyes opened.  
&nbsp;  
&nbsp;  
1. and that plugs nicely into this point. There are things you **must remember**
which you don't care or don't want to see and there are those things you **don't
want to forget** which you care a lot and aren't always visible. You need two
separate systems<sup>†</sup>.  
&nbsp;  
The common tasks are usually in the first category, for this you need a simple
tasklist with remainders, something you can forget about but you know it'll come
up at the right moment, and this is important to be a guarantee!  
&nbsp;  
Then you have your ideas, your developments, your projects.
Those are more disorganised in nature and I usually leave them in
[Evernote](https://evernote.com/){:target="_blank"}. There's a generic _idea dumper_ note and _project
notebooks_. _Project notebooks_ is where I drop everything I can about a... project.
They also include a *next steps* note to keep track
of where I left it and what I was thinking about when that happened
(not a strict task list, just a lighthouse for future guidance).  
&nbsp;  
The things I really care about I just have to make sure they're easily searchable
or visible (in shortcuts), but by the nature of caring about it, you'll get back
there often, no need for reminders or to-dos (other than the occasional something
you must remember, nothing's black & white).  
&nbsp;  
&nbsp;  
1. Observe everyday and turn the knobs as soon as you notice something fishy.
When you're not turning knobs you are **doing the stuff you care about**, but
do not stress when you don't achieve much by the end of the day. I heard somewhere
_"it is not what you do 10% of the time, it is what you do 90% of the time that
matters"_, just try as hard as you can, but not harder.  
&nbsp;  
&nbsp;  

## So, what's this all about?

The main point is, you **do not want** to look at the _must-dos_ when you're
working on the _interesting stuff_! It'll get confusing, busy and you'll stop
looking at the things you care about. In the end you have to remember you're only
organising yourself so you can achieve more of what you want, it is just a tool.  

Progress happens when you get your hands dirty everyday, and keep observing
and nudging yourself into the right direction, but **keep moving** or your muscles
will atrophy!  
&nbsp;  
&nbsp;  
As for tools, like you said, which ones you use isn't that important if you know
what you have to do. Keep changing if that's what it takes to keep the spark on!  
&nbsp;  

<blockquote>
Some things are better left disorganised.
</blockquote>
&nbsp;  

I guess this is enough for today... I'd love to hear what knobs you've been
tweaking lately (is it me or this sounds weird?), leave some comments below.  

<p>
<small>* yes, that is a form of procrastination which I've stopped
doing since.</small><br/>
<small>† hence the post name.</small>  
</p>
